feat(use-cases): add "Separate interface from implementation" (#13)
nixpkgs-architecture/packages-modules: use-cases/Separate-interface-from-implementation.md

# Separate interface from implementation

## General information

The interface and implementation of package definitions should be separated to ensure better maintainability, flexibility, and compatibility between different tools and approaches. A well-defined interface would allow package maintainers to focus on the implementation details while providing stability and consistency for end-users. It would also enable out-of-tree packaging libraries to interoperate with Nixpkgs more effectively, reducing the need for duplicated efforts and custom workarounds.

> 

Reviewer: Something to be addressed: while having clear interfaces is obviously good for maintainability, it is also a pretty powerful feature of Nixpkgs that you *can* override things in a hacky way, e.g. through `.overrideDerivation`. I'm not sure we want to disallow such mechanisms entirely, since they're often the most convenient way to do local overrides. The alternative would be having to clone the package expression.

So we may want to still provide hacky override mechanisms like `.overrideDerivation`, as long as it's clear to users that such mechanisms don't come with any interface stability guarantees.

Author: Re-phrased this slightly and added it to the general information section via 7b6081fce85129c8d82afb2e92af5ecc615b6a3c

> ## Concrete examples

Reviewer 2: Is it correct to assume, that you deliberately did not include any code examples because this is mostly a problem description at this point?

Author: I'm not sure if I have a good example for now. I could link some drv-parts module, like the [interface](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/adf43d27081fae7affd1e66bc13b67ae73b14063/v1/nix/modules/drv-parts/pip/interface.nix) and [implementation](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/main/v1/nix/modules/drv-parts/pip/default.nix) of the pip module.

But as you said, this is more of a solution for the problem so I'm not sure if it belongs here.

Scenario 1: Out of tree implementations (eg. lang2nix)
Alice maintains a packaging library that simplifies python packaging. Because nixpkgs offers a well defined packaging interface, she is able to design her library so that it provides good stability without suffering from sudden breakages introduced by implementation changes in nixpkgs.

Scenario 2: Change implementation details
Bob is a maintainer of the python framework in nixpkgs. He makes an improvement on the python packaging logic. He can be confident about not breaking downstream packages because he only changed the implementation, not the interface.

Scenario 3: Mixing different implementations
Carl wants to build a python project with dependencies. Some of the dependencies are defined by a lock file and are not available from nixpkgs. Carl would like to build some of the packages using poetry2nix while mixing in other existing package from nixpkgs seamlessly.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Scenario 4: Upgrading a package
Dave does some refactoring to the Emacs Nix expression in Nixpkgs, but it's reverted because it breaks things for some users who were doing some `.override*` on Emacs. Dave would like to know what parts of the Emacs Nix expression should be considered an "interface".
```
(Real-world example where `s/Dave/Eelco`, https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/commit/14154fea5263b42b8ad982d7efe2061201f60f70.)

## Current problems

> **Non-composable implementations**: Different implementations like the one from nixpkgs and out of tree packaging libraries (eg. lang2nix) are often incompatible. They often cannot be easily combined and there is a lock-in to a certain tool. For example, if poetry2nix is used for python, the user cannot simply inherit all the well-maintained build logic from nixpkgs. The logic from nixpkgs has to be duplicated either manually or by the community of poetry2nix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Non-composable implementations**: Different implementations like the one from nixpkgs and out of tree packaging libraries (eg. lang2nix) are often incompatible. They often cannot be easily combined and there is a lock-in to a certain tool. For example, if poetry2nix is used for python, the user cannot simply inherit all the well-maintained build logic from nixpkgs. The logic from nixpkgs has to be duplicated manually, by individual users or the tools community.
```

> **Non-composable implementations**: Different implementations like the one from nixpkgs and out of tree packaging libraries (eg. lang2nix) are often incompatible. They often cannot be easily combined and there is a lock-in to a certain tool. For example, if poetry2nix is used for python, the user cannot simply inherit all the well-maintained build logic from nixpkgs. The logic from nixpkgs has to be duplicated manually, by individual users or the tools community.

Reviewer: It's not entirely clear what this has to do with interface/implementation separation, since having the latter would not necessarily be composable.

> For example, if poetry2nix is used for python, the user cannot simply inherit all the well-maintained build logic from nixpkgs.

Who is the "user" in this case? A user of poetry2nix, or the implementer of poetry2nix? And why can't they re-use the build logic from Nixpkgs? It makes sense in the case of the implementer, since they wouldn't want to depend on a fragile implementation.

Author: I have rewritten and renamed the section in afe4ba1c29a25d1e2908ebdeb22812a242f5820c.
I also added the explanation:
`While having well defined interfaces isn't a guarantee for compatibility, it can make it simpler to achieve it.`

@edolstra does it make more sense now? If not, I could just remove this problem. We have enough other ones anyways.
